the chapter is about the history of the arabesque and other ornaments 
debussy wrote about finding the perfect idea and only adding ornaments that are absolutely necessary
how much was the right amount of ornamentation was a struggle for debussy
music critic octave maus said debussy's string quartet op. 10 found the perfect balance
debussy wrote more ornamented works and octave maus disliked them
his use of ornaments changed a lot between his string quartet (1893) and his images (1901-5) and l'isle joyeuse (1904)
debussy had begun to see the increased ornamentation as identifiably french and avant-garde
critic Pierre Lalo wrote that debussy created a new way of writing for piano
ravel wanted more credit for developing the style too, jeux d'eau was published in 1902
bhogal argues that ravel had raison
but despite that, his early piano writing in songs anticipated some of the decorated figures of later
after jeux d'eau, the two composers pushed each other on

-- note! suite bergamasque composed 1890, revised and published in 1905 --

debussy's estampes and l'isle joyeuse, ravel's sonatine and miroirs, debussy's images, ravel's gaspard de la nuit, debussy's 2 books of preludes and ravel's valses nobles et sentimentales

-- no mention of albeniz iberia! --

bhogal asks why they used so much ornamentation
prior composers (liszt, chopin, Fauré) didn't allow the background material to overstep the foreground

* precursors *

ravel and debussy both admired chopin and liszt
chopin's ornaments were most influenced by bel canto singing
chopin thought liszt used ornaments too indiscriminately 
liszt separated melody and accompaniment
except sometimes when liszt put elaborate figurations close to the frame, which became central to french ornaments


-- start here

Fauré was frequently compared to painter antoine watteau, remembered for paysages decoratifs (pictures)
Fauré was also compared to chopin
bhogal argues that in the third barcarolle, Fauré used too much decoration
in the third barcarolle, the melody is ornamented everywhere throughout
the more decorated middle section, rich textures, intricate rhythms 
this ballade was called the forerunner of musical impressionism, but maybe it should have been the third barcarolle, which ambiguously blends accompaniment and melody and uses elaborate ornamental figures

* debussy's showers of pearls * 

critic michel dimitri calvocoressi divided music into musique cérébrale and musique sensorielle. musique sensorielle was the art of debussy, ravel, and friends.
musique sensorielle was devoid of intellectualism and formalism and enjoys sonorities and melodies for their own sake
aligning musique sensorielle with ornaments and decoration was a common way to describe the music of debussy and ravel
detractors used this to say their music was impulsive and self-absorbed
supporters said their music was new and original 
critic Léon Vallas said the source of debussy's innovation was in the decorative arabesques: 

--quote--

Ces arabesques flottantes et imprécises dans leur dessin, leur rhythme et leur tonalité, voila l'élément essentiel de l'écriture pianistique nouvelle; Debussy aime à leur opposer des accords solennellement plaqués, que les deux mains renforcent.

-Léon Vallas, Le Nouveau Style Pianistque: Claude Debussy

-- end quote --

Vallas noted that debussy juxtaposed the ornaments and arabesques with the opposite, block chords
Vallas criticized reflets dans l'eau from images, said it was too imprecise, too fragmented
the ornaments in reflets dans l'eau control the form, meter, and texture
debussy focused on short motifs instead of long themes, this allows the listener time to get distracted
the light ornaments are often in the foreground
metric discomfort, emphasis at the end of the meter
listeners are immersed in the ornaments at some times and distant from it at others
water is a recurring idea

many critics didn't like reflets dans l'eau, inclus octave maus, Léon Vallas, Alfred Bruneau, Pierre Lalo
Lalo especially mocked ravel and miroirs

-- quote --

On raille la 'pluie des perles' des pianistes d'antan; mais qu'est-ce que cette pluie de notes des jeunes compositeurs d'aujourd'hui, sinon une autre pluie de perles, plus incontinente encore? La pluie des perles de jadis tombait tout droit, avec simplicité , candeur, et régularité; la nôtre est irrégulière, tombe en oblique, rebondit, rejaillit et se croise en tous sens; mais c'est toujours la pluie de perles. Et cette musique et toujours pareille, exprime et suggère toujours les mêmes choses: un murmure de ruisseau qui coule, un petit clapotis de l'onde sur la rive. Ces jeunes gens clapotent très bien. Mais ils ne font que clapoter. Quand auront-ils fini de s'amuser à des jeux d'eau? C'est pourquoi l'on écoute avec plaisir, au milieu de bruit de leurs divertissements puérils, un son plus humain et plus grave. Une barque sur l'océan? Pas encore. L'océan est plus grand que cela: un lac tout au plus. Mais c'est déjà beaucoup d'avoir mis une barque sur le lac, et un sentiment dans la musique. 

-- end quote --
